Testing.
Hello.
Do I get introduced?
I guess not.
All right, guys,
you're going to get me in trouble.
I'm Sal Soghoian.
I'm the AppleScript product
manager for Apple Computer,
and thank you for coming here today.
Thank you for coming to San Francisco.
Thank you for being a part of this
revolution that's going on right now.
And I really appreciate you being here,
and the AppleScript team
appreciates it as well.
I first fell in love with
AppleScript back in 1992
when I got the developer CD,
and I saw that there was the ability
for a normal schmo to be able to make
the computer do what I wanted it to do.
And the vision I had then was
to be able to create automation
and workflows where I could take
information from one program,
manipulate it,
move it to another program,
take that and move it to another
program and build something.
And in the decade following,
that vision happened.
And the development of the
system has not dimmed at all.
And matter of fact,
it has grown considerably.
As you saw today is the pinnacle
of what we've been able to do with
our new Xcode and AppleScript's
integration as a peer language with
Objective-C and Java as a development
language in the operating system.
It's unparalleled in what it can do now.
We have access into all the system APIs.
We can call the command line.
We can do web services.
We have the interface,
and we can even control the
UI elements of AppleScript.
We can do applications
that aren't scriptable.
So it's been quite an adventure,
and it's progressing on and
going even farther every day.
But instead of me giving
you this overview,
I'm going to introduce someone who
is new to the AppleScript team.
He's leading the team now,
and he's doing an incredible job,
as you're seeing in Panther,
of delivering more and more
tools and abilities to you,
our AppleScript customers.
So I'd like to introduce Mr.
Todd Fernandez.
And please come on up, Todd.
Thank you.
How is this thing not working?
Thanks a lot, Sal.
Well, good afternoon.
The clicker seems to be
a little haywire today,
but eventually, perhaps we'll get a
slide with my name on it.
There we go.
All right.
Well, good afternoon.
Welcome to Session 401,
AppleScript Update.
As Sal has done that
gracious introduction,
I'm Todd Fernandez.
I'm the relatively new
AppleScript Engineering Manager,
and I'm very pleased to be here
with you today to talk to you and
show you a lot of the great new
work we've been doing for Panther.
Now, I know a lot of you have been coming
to WWDC for years and have been
working with AppleScript for years,
and are probably wondering who
I am and what I'm doing up here,
since for the last five years running,
Chris Espinoza has been
presenting this session.
And in fact, last year,
both presenters were named Chris.
So I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
To make everybody feel more comfortable,
you can call me Chris.
I'll respond, Todd, Chris, whatever.
So now that we've gotten
that out of the way,
let's get started.
So here's our agenda.
We'll go through a brief introduction.
I'll make sure we bring everybody
up to date on what's happened since
the last time we were here together,
and then spend the bulk of the
presentation going over the many
new features and enhancements
we've got cooking for Panther.
This thing is really finicky.
All right.
So the first thing I want to
do is go over the three things
that I hope that you all take
away from this session today.
First of all,
what are the changes that we're
making in Panther for AppleScript?
Secondly, and more importantly,
how you can take advantage of them to
improve your scripts and applications.
And something that
Sal just was talking about,
and which I hope you saw in the keynote
and Steve using it for his demo,
that all the changes we're making,
all of the work that you're
doing with your scripts,
enhancing your scriptable applications.
Hopefully there are people here
with newly scriptable applications.
We really feel there's a lot of momentum
building behind AppleScript on Mac OS X,
and we hope that we can share our
excitement with you during this session.
and what I really want to do
is thank all of you because the
community is one of the things
that makes AppleScript so great.
And all the work we're doing,
combining with all the work you're doing,
to solve problems for our customers.
[Transcript missing]
Thanks very much, Sal.
And I'd like to continue by going over
the version history of AppleScript so
we're up to speed with where we are.
It's been a busy couple of years.
You're going to see a whole lot of
releases we've done since the release
of Mac OS X a little over two years ago.
We shipped AppleScript 1.6
alongside with the initial release
of AppleScript of Mac OS X,
followed by version 1.7 with
Mac OS X 10.1 and for Mac OS 9 as well.
We then shipped AppleScript 1.8 with
the December 2001 developer tools,
and a series of updates after that,
culminating in AppleScript 1.8.3,
which was an independent software
update for both Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
Last year at the conference,
we were talking about AppleScript 1.9,
which in fact we shipped with Jaguar,
Mac OS X 10.2.
We shipped a significant update
late last year as AppleScript 1.9.1
in the Mac OS X 10.2.3 update,
and then the Script Editor 2
and System Events betas with
the December 2002 developer
tools late last year.
So that brings us up to date with
where we are with AppleScript,
and I'm pleased to announce
today we're going to be shipping,
if the clicker will cooperate,
AppleScript 1.9.2 with Panther.
Now, you might look at the version
number there and think,
well, gosh, they must not have
been working very hard.
It's just a minor release.
But we're just conserving
version numbers.
We, in fact,
have done an awful lot of work,
which we'll go through now.
If we can actually get
the clicker to work.
So let's dive right in and
start talking about what we've
been working on for Panther.
go through four separate areas.
We're going to talk about
some new formats for saving
your scripts in applets.
A long list of
scriptability enhancements,
touching nearly every component
of the AppleScript system.
There are a few changes to be aware of
as you move to Panther for both scripts
and your scriptable applications.
And then I'm going to touch
briefly on AppleScript Studio.
So let's just jump right in.
So you might be wondering, well,
what are these new bundle formats?
and you might actually
see them someday here.
All right.
Well, they're a new alternative to
the data and resource fork
formats you're all familiar with.
They use the standard Mac OS X packaging
with script document file packages for
compiled scripts and .app application
bundles for applets and droplets.
Of course, they're supported by
all the standard tools.
Script Editor, OSA Compile,
and StoreScript all can save and access
scripts in Applets in these new formats.
And in fact,
I know that a lot of you have
been asking for this for years,
OSA Compile and StoreScript can
now create new applets and
droplets in the new format.
Yes, thank you very much.
The team's worked very hard on this.
However,
in order to get some of these advantages,
there is a downside.
Because the old AppleScript runtime
and tools on earlier versions
of Mac OS X don't know anything
about these new formats,
these new formats do require Panther.
However,
if you do need your scripts to run
on earlier versions of Mac OS X,
of course the old formats are still
supported and still will be supported.
However,
there are some pretty significant
advantages to these new formats
that we think will make them
worth your while to adopt if,
in fact, you can live with the lack
of backward compatibility.
They're more flexible.
Applets can be moved
easily across file systems,
even if the file systems don't
know anything about resource forks.
This makes it easy to store large chunks
of data that your scripts depend on
right as part of the script itself,
such as pictures or movies.
This also enables us to save
persistent script attributes,
particularly in Script Editor 2.
Examples are the description
for your script and the
window bounds and location,
so that every time you
open your script again,
you don't have to drag it down and
resize it just the way you like it.
Now, in fact, Script Editor 2,
the version that's in the
Panther Developer Preview,
doesn't yet do this,
but it will before we ship it.
Stay tuned.
So, so far I've been talking about what
these new formats mean for scripters.
What do they mean for
application developers?
So, if your application needs
to interact directly with
scripts and load and run them,
we have a set of new OS A APIs that
support all the script file formats,
the new ones as well as all the old ones.
So we strongly encourage you to
adopt these APIs in your application.
The obvious pairs,
we have OSA load file and store
file to load and store scripts.
and we have a pair of convenience methods
that build on OSA load file and do with
script what you need to do with them.
We think that these new OSA APIs will
help you simplify your code,
make it easier to read and maintain.
And of course, you'll need to do this to
support the new bundle formats.
So that's the new bundle formats.
Let's start going through
all the enhancements we made
to scriptability in Panther.
And as you can see from this list,
as I mentioned earlier,
we've touched almost every
component in the system.
So let's start with Script Editor 2,
which hopefully many of
you have seen already.
We released the beta late last year.
As you know,
it's a Cocoa scriptable replacement
for what we understand is the
oldest remaining application that
still ships as part of Mac OS X,
but no longer.
So those of you who have
worked with it realize it's got
some amazing new technology.
Check this out.
Unlike the technology
built into this clicker,
it's got drag and drop.
It's got find and replace.
Can you believe it?
They can work with
scripts larger than 32K.
I don't know why anyone would want to,
but you know if you do, now you can.
and hey, it's got undo.
Now I'm sure no one in this
audience would ever make a mistake
when they're coding their scripts,
but you know,
sometimes maybe the cat walks
across the keyboard when you're
getting coffee or something,
I don't know.
So it's there if you need it.
So more seriously though,
we're really excited about this great
new tool that we're providing for you.
And what we're doing,
hopefully many of you saw the demos
and the sessions on the new Xcode IDE.
And what we're trying to do with
Script Editor 2 is adopt some of
the innovative new user interface
elements that have gone into Xcode
and we're going to continue to do that
as we approach the final release of
Script Editor 2 alongside with Panther.
So, one great enhancement I know
you're all going to love is that
we've made Open Dictionary much
faster in the new Script Editor.
You're not going to believe it.
There is a caveat, however,
that I'll get to later when we get to
changes to be aware of for you scriptable
application developers out there.
However, we told you about it last year,
so you shouldn't need to
worry about it anymore.
And Script Editor 2 creates new
applets in the bundle format
that we just talked about.
However,
it will save existing applets in the
same format that they're already in.
So that's Script Editor 2.
Let's move on to folder actions.
As you know, folder actions returned,
although it's not going
to show up on the slide,
last year in Mac OS X 10.2.
We believe in Panther,
we've made them better than ever.
So, the contextual menu in
Finder is back in Panther.
Now of course that doesn't
make it better than ever.
It returns us to where
we were with Mac OS 9,
but we've got a great new
tool that we're really excited
about that we never had before.
We call it Folder Action Setup,
which again,
if the slide ever... There we go.
All right, so Folder Action Setup shows
you all of the attached folder
actions on your system as a whole,
something you couldn't do before.
It also provides UI for enabling,
disabling, attaching, removing,
or editing individual
folder actions or scripts.
And that's something you
couldn't do before either.
It wasn't possible to enable
or disable an individual script
that was part of a folder action,
but now you can.
Folder Actions Setup is in
the Panther Developer Preview,
but I do want to make you aware
that the functionality that's in the
Developer Preview is not complete for
what we're going to ship in Panther.
It's already very useful,
and I think you're going to like it,
but it's not complete.
So now we've talked about folder actions,
let's move on to Script Menu.
We've got a lot of great new
enhancements to Script Menu,
making it even easier to use.
In fact, you saw Steve was running
it during the demo.
I'll start from the bottom
because even unfortunately
it's not enabled by default,
but it's very easy to install and we're
going to show that to you in a moment.
We've also added support for aliases
including for remote machines.
And you can put applications, droplets,
documents,
almost anything you want in there and
ScriptMenu will do the correct thing
to open it or display it or whatever
would be the appropriate thing.
We've also added some new ways to access
what you've got stored in ScriptMenu.
If you select a folder,
it will open it for you in Finder.
If you select a script while
holding down the option key,
it will open it for you in
ScriptEditor so you can get
right to editing your script.
We've also made it easier to
work with ScriptMenu if you've
got a lot of your own scripts.
Previously you had all the library
example scripts in the top of the menu
and the user scripts down at the bottom.
We've now made it very easy to hide the
library example scripts so that it's
easier to work with your own scripts.
And we've also added a great new
feature that allows you to add
scripts specific to a particular
application to ScriptMenu.
So that when you have that
application frontmost,
those scripts show up
beneath your user scripts.
So now I've been talking
about all these things,
I'd like to actually show them to you,
and I'd like to ask Tim Bumgarner
to come up and help me show you the
enhancements we made to Script Menu,
Folder Actions,
and Script Editor 2 in Panther.
TIM BUMGARNER: Thank you.
Thanks, Todd.
So the first thing we'd like to
do is show you how easy it is
to install it on your menu bar.
Yes,
notice that it's not in here by default.
And we'll just double click here.
Simple double click, there it is.
And you can see all the library
example scripts are there,
but all you need to do is hide them.
And then you'll see
just your user scripts,
which are the ones in your library
scripts off your home directory.
So if you select a folder,
as I just mentioned,
it'll open them for you in Finder.
And if you hold down the Option key
while selecting a script,
it will open it for you in Script Editor.
So if you notice here,
if Tim will go back to script menu,
you see all the
Script Editor scripts there.
So how did we do that?
If we go back to Finder,
you'll see that the scripts are no
longer there in Script Menu because
Script Editor 2 is no longer frontmost.
But what if we wanted to have
some Finder-specific scripts?
So all you need to do is in
your Library Scripts folder,
create a folder called Applications,
which you can see in
the Finder window there.
- Turn it over, right?
- Yep.
And you can see we've got
a link to Script Editor,
and we just made a link to
the Finder example scripts.
Of course, you can make these anything
you want that you want to
show up on Finder's frontmost.
You just need to make the name
of the alias of the folder,
whatever's in there,
match the name of the application that
you want these scripts to show up for.
And now if we go back to Script Menu,
you'll see that all the
Finder scripts have shown up.
And you can see each one
has its own individual set.
This is an exciting feature.
I've been looking for
this for a long time.
And hopefully all of you
will find it useful as well.
So let's move on to folder actions.
So as I mentioned, the Folder Actions
contextual menu is back.
So if we select a folder,
hold down the Control key,
you'll see we've got a
couple of options there.
We can enable Folder Actions.
And let's add one.
So attach a folder action to the desktop,
and let's just use one of the examples.
Oh, we have to go find the right way.
We'll go down the long way here.
Flying, demoing without a net.
Scripts.
There we go.
All right.
Click Choose.
Okay, that's how easy it is.
You can see that it actually is there.
It added it,
so we can remove it if we needed to.
Or edit it.
Mm-hmm.
All right, well, let's try one out.
We've actually got a folder action.
Steve mentioned this morning
about the new built-in
conversion from PostScript to
PDF that's available in Panther.
We're going to make use of
that now using AppleScript.
We've got a folder action attached
to this PDF output folder.
There's a PostScript to
PDF attached to it.
And if we drop this
PostScript file in there,
I'm going to shug along.
And you can see that our new item
alert we just added to the desktop
pops up to let us know we've got this
new PDF that's just been created there.
And it's a handy file for this week,
nice map of San Francisco.
And we're here somewhere,
I'm not sure exactly where.
Well, we're all here, right?
All right,
so I mentioned that we've got this
great new tool folder action set up,
so let's show you that.
You can access it from the
applications AppleScript menu,
or in folder and finder,
or just launch it from
the contextual menu,
as Tim just did.
As you can see, you can enable and
disable folder actions.
You can examine existing folder
actions and see the attached
scripts that are part of them.
You can delete or
remove attached scripts.
And you can also delete
entire folder actions.
And of course add them.
You can also edit scripts
directly from folder action setup.
Go to public.
Either one.
Hit edit script.
It'll open it for us in Script Editor.
So that's the new tool,
Folder Action Setup.
Give it a try.
Give us your feedback.
As I said, we're still working on it.
We want to add some great
new functionality to it.
And with that,
I'll turn it over to Tim to go over
some new features in Script Editor 2.
Great.
Well, thank you, Todd.
Good job.
All right.
Very excited about this.
We're releasing a second beta here
at the conference in the Panther.
It should be out on your Panther CD,
as Todd mentioned.
And I want to talk about a few things,
as Todd mentioned as well,
that it's built on Cocoa,
and that's really powerful.
We get a lot of functionality for free,
and he went through those.
So I'm just going to go right in and
talk about some of the new things,
the scriptability of
Script Editor itself.
And I'm going to type
a little script here,
and what I'm going to do is I'm
going to make a new document.
So I'm in Script Editor itself.
I don't need to tell another
application because I'm
scripting Script Editor itself.
So I'm going to make a new document,
and I'm going to set the
contents of the front document.
Now you'll notice if you were watching
really carefully there was some little
ellipses in there and some type ahead.
And if I start typing here you'll
see that it's got a little ellipses.
This is a new feature
called Code Assistant.
I'm not sure the name will stay
the same because we use Code Sense.
It's the same technology
that we're using in Xcode.
So it's trying to guess what the
thing is that I'm trying to type.
So if I type an I or an SP in
this case it's diacriticals.
Oh, there it is.
Expose jumped right in and got me.
Okay.
Don't hit that key.
In this case it's not set up for
display but I could bring up a list.
[Transcript missing]
And hopefully I typed that correctly.
And now, so what I've done is
I'm going to tell it,
script editor, make a new document,
set the contents of that new
document to this other script,
and now I'm going to tell it to execute.
So I'm going to execute
the front document.
So we're gonna compile that.
Build and run,
and what you're going to see is
a new window and a display dialog
that comes up right after that.
So I could use scripting and
script the script editor itself.
It's a pretty cool thing that you can do.
And there's tons of things
that you can do with that.
Okay, so let's close all those.
Another thing that we can do,
Another new feature is
we've added this nav bar.
Again,
Todd had mentioned that we're trying
to work with the tools group and
use some of the same technology,
the same look and feel.
And so if I show the navigation bar,
it actually shows me a couple
different things this nav bar pops up.
One is the different components
that we have on the system.
In this case,
we just have the AppleScript component.
And this lists our elements.
So if I use our drag and drop,
I can drag in a simple
little script here.
And you'll notice now
that it populates it,
so I can go to my global property,
or a global or a property,
or to a different handler.
And even more importantly,
as I'm moving around,
you'll notice up here that it's tracking
which script or what element that I'm in,
which is great for really large scripts.
You can jump and navigate very
simply and find out where you are.
Okay,
another thing I'm really excited about,
and I use all the time myself,
is under the window menu,
we've added a library window.
And when you bring this up,
it lists all of the ‑‑ I can put
any scriptable application that
I'm using on a regular basis.
And so I can just simply go through
here and select one like the finder
and click on the open dictionary,
and I can quickly get to the
dictionary and find out any
information I want about that.
So I can just double click on it,
do the same thing, look at text edit.
And the other thing I can do is
I can create a new script from here.
So if I click the finder
and say make new script,
you can see that it automatically fills
out the teleapplication block for me,
so I don't have to go
type that every time,
which saves a ton of time.
I can do something like name of every
‑‑ you can see it's auto typing for me.
I can hit the complete key,
and I can type window
and hit the complete key.
So it knows what I'm trying to
type and will let me do that.
So let's go ahead and run that.
In this case,
I don't have any windows open,
so let's go in here
and add a few windows.
And I'll even minimize those
because they don't have to be open.
And we'll run this again.
And you can see down here,
another thing we've done is
we've consolidated the separate
result window and event log.
And we've put them all
into a single window,
which makes it much simpler to use and
keeps it with the themes that we're
trying to do in the tools group as well.
All right,
so let's go ahead and close that.
Now, since the Script Editor itself
is scriptable,
what we're going to do is we
can take advantage of that,
and we have these things that
are the contextual menus.
They're the same menus
that are over here,
so you can use them now
in two different ways.
You can come choose them from here,
or you can actually come in here and
type something like name of every window,
and I can select these
and use the modifier key,
the control key,
I can bring up the contextual menu,
and do a tell block.
So I can say, let's do tell finder,
and it takes that bit of code and
puts it inside the tell block form.
And we can run that,
and we've already seen that,
but I can come in here and say, oh,
let's make a set disk list to every disk.
Now, using that same scriptability,
we can select this list,
and what I want to do is I want to
iterate or repeat over every item
in that list and do a little action.
So I select the disk list,
go down to the repeat,
and choose process every item,
and watch what will happen
in the script itself.
It goes through, takes the list,
writes the script for us,
substitutes that, and gets ready for us
just to put our action in.
for every item in that list.
Now another feature that we've added,
which I really use a lot,
because I do a lot of
testing of scripting,
and we've added histories.
There's a result history
and event log history.
You might have noticed that as
I bring up a script window here,
I can type current date and run that,
and you'll see that the
history shows up here,
and if I run it again,
I'll get a little bit
of a different value.
And I can even compare that by
selecting two of them and see what
the differences were between that.
Or I can come back to this
script that ran a little earlier.
And now the nice thing is that I'll
go ahead and close this window,
and you go, you know,
I just did something in that
script just a minute ago,
but I closed it, I forgot to save it.
Well, during the,
you can just double click and get back
to the script that generated that result.
So you can go back to that.
There are a lot.
There's a ton of other features,
and we're going to just
keep improving this.
We're really excited about it.
And I'll bring Todd back up.
Thanks.
Let me get back to slides, please.
Thank you.
One thing that I neglected to mention
earlier and I wanted to let you know is,
in addition to shipping this
new version of Script Editor in
the Panther Developer Preview,
we're also making it available as
a second beta for Mac OS X 10.2,
and that's already available
on the AppleScript website.
So,
so far we've been talking about tools.
What about the AppleScript runtime
in Standard Edition?
So we've made a lot of
improvements there as well.
Before I show you this next slide,
I will warn you that my speaker
training instructor would be
horrified to see this slide,
but I really left it this way so
you get an idea of the scope of
the number of changes that we've
made in the Standard Edition.
So you might want to shield your eyes,
if in fact the clicker will work.
There we go.
So that's a lot of
stuff up on the screen,
but I would like to highlight two things.
One,
the new Choose Color standard edition.
And that gives you a standard
Mac OS X color picker and returns
you a list of the RGB values.
The second I'd like to highlight is
the long list of new special folder
enumerations we've added a path to.
If you want to get to the Movies folder,
we've made it very easy to do that,
and in a portable way so that it's
very easy for you to give the script
to somebody else and it will work
correctly on their system as well.
So let's talk about the
AppleScript runtime as well.
We've made a lot of changes there also.
First of which I know that a lot of
you are going to be excited about,
applets now handle events first in,
first out, so that you can now
write AppleScript CGI's.
A little excitement there.
All right.
We've made Unicode constants
much more easy to use,
and we've made a number of
enhancements to the date class,
which we'll go over now.
I think you'll be excited about these,
too.
Well, first we added a short date string.
and the format of this string is
controlled by the International Panel on
System Preferences.
More exciting, I think,
might be that months can
now be coerced to numbers.
And of course,
that means that months can be compared.
So you can write things like this.
All right.
So let's dive back into some tools.
System Events.
We released a beta late last year
with the new GUI scripting feature,
which I'll get to in a moment.
We've also made a number of other
changes in the various suites
that make up System Events.
So in the System Events suite,
we've merged all the application
classes from the other suites into
one in the System Events suite.
And that class has gained
a number of new properties,
including one related to the
new GUI scripting feature.
Disk folder file has also
seen a number of improvements.
We've added a handful of
new verbs and new classes,
including a new class called Disk Item,
which both file and folder inherit from,
so that if you want to see all files,
you can do that.
If you want to see all folders,
And if you want to see both of them,
all the disk items,
we've made it very easy to do that.
We've also added the same list of special
folder properties to match path to,
so it doesn't matter whether
you're using the Scripting
Edition or scripting system events.
And that brings us to
the Processes Suite,
which is where the new
GUI scripting feature is.
You know,
I may just carry the keyboard with me.
Will that actually work?
There we go.
Yay!
So GUI scripting.
I'm sure a number of you have worked
with the beta that we released last year,
but I want to make sure
that the message gets clear,
gets through, about what we think
GUI scripting is good for.
Thanks.
So we believe there are two
main uses for GUI scripting.
One is for automated
GUI testing of applications,
and if you're interested in that,
you should come to John Comiskey's
session 311 on Friday morning.
He's going to tell you all about it.
The second one is if you've got...
and David So the second use we
see for GUI scripting is you've
got a complicated workflow,
you've got a number of great
scriptable applications to do what
you're doing for your workflow,
and there's one application that's
not scriptable or has one little
alert panel that's not scriptable,
and all you need to do is click OK,
and your entire workflow
will be scriptable.
That might be a good problem
that GUI scripting might
be able to help you solve.
However, and I can't stress this
strongly enough-- Point at me,
pretend you got-- Slide, please.
It's not a substitute for
object model scriptability.
It's not.
So let's not get confused about that.
I'll go into more detail
about why in a moment.
But practically speaking,
GUI scripting is part of the
System Events Processes suite.
There's a new UI Element class
that Process now inherits from,
and it also has it as an element so
that you can walk down the hierarchy
of UI elements in an application.
And UI elements are just standard
GUI widgets you're familiar with,
splitters, radio buttons,
the ones there I've listed on the slide.
Slide, please.
So why isn't this a good replacement
for object model scriptability?
Well, there are four big limitations.
One is that it's disabled by default.
So that if you write a great
GUI scripting script and you
hand it off to somebody else,
well,
it's not going to run on their system
until they set a specific obscure
preference in system preferences.
What we recommend is that you actually
add a check to your GUI scripting
scripts that will tell the user why
it's not going to run and tell them
what they need to do so it will run.
So that's a resolvable problem.
However, the next ones are a
little bit more serious.
GUI scripting scripts are going
to be extremely fragile when the
application's UI changes because
they're dependent on the ordering of
the different UI elements on the window.
So that whenever the
developer adds a new button,
a new text field, a new whatever,
which pretty much means every time they
release a new version of the application,
your GUI scripting
script is going to break.
So software testers to
test your application,
they probably are going to be
willing to put up with that.
But your customers aren't.
They really need object model scripting
to protect them against this fragility.
Another serious limitation is that
GUI scripting scripts cannot control
non-standard interface elements.
So if you're writing your own
special widget that's not Cocoa,
GUI scripting scripts aren't going
to be able to control it unless you
do a lot of extra work to make it
work with the accessibility API.
Now I'm sure none of you
use non-standard controls,
I'm sure you just drag
them in IB off the palette,
but if you do, GUI scripting won't
work for your customers.
And a fourth limitation is that
GUI scripting does not work
well with non-English languages.
This is primarily connected
with keystrokes and keycodes.
We have some ideas of how to
address this particular limitation,
but it's never going to
be completely robust.
So what are the solutions
to these limitations?
Well,
you need object model scriptability,
so that if you're a scripter and you
have an application that you need to use
or want to use and it's not scriptable,
you should request object model
scriptability from the developer.
If you're an application
developer and you haven't made
your application scriptable yet,
well, you should come to the session on
Thursday morning and find out how,
because your customers need and
deserve object model scriptability.
So that brings me to a
completely new feature,
image events.
Now, okay then.
So we can deconstruct the name here.
Events, well,
it sounds like system events,
and in fact,
it's also a faceless scriptable
application like system events.
Hang on, Tim.
An image, well, you know,
you're working with images,
so it's actually a superset of color
sync and image capture scriptability.
So what can you do with image events?
Well, you can manipulate images
in color sync profiles.
You can access image metadata.
You can add or change a profile.
You can rotate crop scale images,
and you can translate file formats.
So hang on.
I'll point at you.
So we're excited about this.
We think this will be very useful for
workflows where you don't necessarily
want to be launching all these
UIs to script your application.
You can just tell Image Events what
you want to do with your images
and do a lot of batch processing.
However,
the version of Image Events that's
in your Panther developer
preview is not functional yet.
The dictionary is there,
so you can definitely look at
that in Script Editor and give us
your feedback on the dictionary.
But you'll have to wait for the
final release of Panther to see
Image Events in all its glory.
Thank you Tim.
So, PDF Workflow.
Steve talked a lot about PDFs
this morning in the keynote.
And although this feature
isn't actually new in Panther,
it was added in Mac OS X 10.2.4,
we think it's a great feature and
we're going to actually show it
to you in a demo in a few moments.
It's documented on the
AppleScript website,
how to use it.
And what it allows you to do is do
arbitrary processing of saved PDF files
directly from the print dialog.
You can run any AppleScript you
want so you can do anything that
AppleScript can do with the PDF file.
And I'll show you a couple of examples.
What you need to do for your AppleScripts
are use an open handler to receive
the references to the saved files.
And when you create scripts or some
of the other things that you can do
to affect what the saved PDF file
will do is just add these scripts
and links to folders or anything
else like that to a PDF services
folder in your library folder.
And you can put this in your home
directory library folder if you
just want to see it yourself.
If you want to make it available
to anyone using your machine,
you can put it in slash library
and of course you can put it
in network library as well.
Thanks Tim.
One of the things we're
very excited about,
and I think you can tell from
hearing AppleScript mentioned
in all the earlier sessions,
is across Mac OS X we're seeing
enhanced scriptability to major system
applications such as Address Book,
Finder, iPhoto, and Mail.
And in fact, we have two major newly
scriptable apps in Panther.
The new iChat AV is scriptable.
and the new Xcode IDE is also scriptable,
and Tim, in fact,
is going to demo that scriptability
in his AppleScript Studio session
on Wednesday afternoon.
So we're very excited about this,
and we're going to continue to work
with our colleagues to continue adding
great new scriptable apps on Mac OS X.
And with that, I'd actually like to show
you the PDF workflow feature.
and Ty together with some of the
great scriptable apps on Mac OS X.
Can we add demo three, please?
So this is the web page that documents
the feature on the AppleScript web page.
And I'll just show you what it looks
like before we add this feature.
You bring up the print dialogs,
the one you're used to.
Here's the Save as PDF button that
Steve highlighted this morning.
We're going to make it even better.
So one of the things you can do,
well first of all we need
to create a PDF services
folder in our library folder.
Let's just drag that over.
All right,
and one thing we can do is we can
actually drag in an alias to a folder,
and what that will tell it to do is
to copy the saved PDF to that folder.
And we'll change the title of this
alias because the name of whatever
is in this folder is what will
show up in the Save to PDF menu.
That's one thing you do.
Another thing you do is
drag applications in,
or aliases to them.
Say you want to have it open in preview.
But what's most powerful
is using AppleScript,
of course,
which allows you to do almost anything.
So let's just drag in the AppleScript,
and I already like that name, so.
Let's go back to Safari.
And if we bring up the
print dialog again.
You'll see that the nice little
Save as PDF button is now a menu.
And you can see that you
still can just save as PDF,
but you can also copy the PDF to
that folder that we made and open it
with preview or any Acrobat Reader,
whatever you want to add in here,
any application.
And then the script.
Now what the script is going to do
is actually receive the PDF file.
after creates it.
It's going to prompt me
for a file name for it,
so let's see, PDF workflow doc,
and when I click OK,
what it's going to do is save the file,
then ask AddressBook for the names and
email addresses for the members of a
PDF reviewer's group within AddressBook,
and tell Mail to create a new message
with this PDF file as an attachment
addressed to those recipients.
And you can see the new
addresses as objects.
And this is just one small example
of what you can do with this
feature and combining it with other
great scriptable applications.
So back to slides, please.
Can we get slides please?
Thank you.
All right,
so we've been talking mostly about
changes that affect scripters.
There are also some significant
enhancements to Cocoa Scripting
for you application developers
out there to improve the
scriptability in your application.
One great new enhancement is that
you can now suspend and then resume
the processing of the particular
Apple Evander script command
that's being handled currently.
This allows you to avoid having the
scripts block on some long process in a
particular application you're scripting.
And also, there's new API that allows
you to access the exact
Apple event that's being handled,
which means you can now set the
return code for the Apple event,
which allows you to get much better error
handling in your scriptable applications.
You can also get direct access to
parameters that Cocoa Scripting
doesn't provide direct access to,
like the subject parameter
and considering ignoring.
And Cocoa Scripting now completely
handles properties for you.
You don't have to write any code,
and you get it for free.
So that brings us to the end of our list
of scriptability enhancements in Panther.
Slide, please.
So I now want to talk about the small
number of things that you really
need to be aware of as you move your
applications and your scripts to Panther.
The first one is that with
the new bundled formats,
if you're using path to
me in a bundled applet,
you will get a path return
that ends with a colon.
What this means is if your script
is relying on getting the container
for the applet by just removing
the last element in the path,
that logic is going to break.
Of course, it's pretty easy to fix.
You just remove the colon
and the last element.
However, if you're using a bundle,
what you really should do is use it
as a bundle and store the files that
you're trying to access inside the bundle
in the contents resources directory,
in which case you want the colon
there because you're going to have
to add contents and resources.
So the next change is that we've changed
the default behavior of offsetof,
and I'll go into more detail in a moment.
This we also told you last year,
and we're reinforcing again this year,
that you should avoid
implicitly encoded text types.
And again, I'll go into a little bit
more detail on further slides.
The final one,
and I alluded to this earlier in
talking about the improved performance
of Open Dictionary in Script Editor 2.
We're using a new API that
only sees applications that
have NSAppleScriptEnabled
equals yes in their Info.plist.
Now we told you about this last year,
so we hope that all of your
applications now have this setting.
But if they don't,
your application won't show up
in the Open Dictionary list.
Now of course your customers can still
drag the application over Script Editor,
and can still browse to your application.
But if you want it to show
up in Open Dictionary,
you will need to add this
setting in your next release.
So, slide please.
So, up to AppleScript 1.9.1,
offset of always considered
case and ignore diacriticals.
This was in fact the opposite of the
defaults in the Apps Script runtime.
And in fact,
the scripting edition didn't honor
ignoring and considering statements.
What we decided to do in
AppleScript 1.9.2-- slide,
please--
is making the default behavior
match the AppleScript defaults
so the system is more consistent,
and make sure that offset of honors
considering ignoring statements.
What this means is if your script
depends on the old behavior,
you're going to need to add considering
case and ignoring diacritical statements
around your uses of offset of.
Hang on.
Okay.
Let's get back to where...
There is one caveat,
however.
About a week and a half ago,
the underlying API that we
used to implement ignoring
diacriticals was changed on us,
so that in fact,
in the developer preview,
ignoring diacriticals won't work.
But we will fix this for Panther.
Next slide, please.
So you need to avoid using
implicitly encoded text types,
specifically type text,
and the reason is it's incapable of
representing international characters.
And in fact, you want to also avoid type
C string and type P string.
Not only can they not represent
international characters,
they don't support a full
set of text coercions.
We're deprecating them in Panther,
and we will remove them
in a future release,
so you need to move off
of these text types.
And what we suggest instead is
that you use type Unicode text.
Thanks, Tim.
So those are the small number of
changes you need to be aware of as you
move your scripts and apps to Panther.
And I'd just like to briefly
mention Apple Script Studio.
I'm going to not steal
too much of Tim's thunder.
We definitely like to thank all
of you for the great number of
Studio apps you've been writing.
It's really exciting to see
all the new apps out there.
And in fact,
if you're interested in Studio,
you may want to go to the Migrating to
Mac OS X session on Thursday morning.
I understand a representative from
Pixar is going to be showing and
talking about the Studio application
they used to move 300 of their
users from Mac OS 9 to Mac OS X.
We're going to be shipping
AppleScript Studio 1.3.
It's in the developer preview,
and it's got a handful of new features,
a new property,
a couple of new event handlers,
and the major new feature,
which is very exciting,
and Tim's going to demo on Wednesday,
you can now write
AppleScript Studio plugins
for the new Xcode IDE.
and as I mentioned,
Wednesday afternoon Tim will go
through this in great detail.
So since you've been such a
great audience in putting up with
me up here instead of a Chris,
I thought I'd actually bring up a
Chris to talk to you about some of
the things he talked about last year.
So Chris, please come up.
Tim keeps watching the slides.
Thank you, Todd.
So that doesn't look quite right.
Could you... Thank you.
Alright, so last year, slide please,
I was up here talking to you about
all the nifty new stuff we were
going to do over the following year,
that is to say, by now.
So, how do we do?
Well, you know,
in theory there's no difference
between theory and practice,
right?
So, reality check time.
What we talked about last year was an
XML replacement for the old AET resource
format for dictionaries called SDEF.
We're going to have a new API called
Carbon Scripting that would make it
much easier to make your application
scriptable if you were writing in Carbon.
We'd allow you to create
scriptable plugins,
both for applications and as
part of AppleScript itself.
We're going to start moving away from
four character codes for terminology,
and we're going to introduce a
major new rev of AppleScript itself
called AppleScript 10.
So,
This year we have some good news,
we have some bad news,
and we have some slightly weird news.
So, slide please.
So the good news first.
SDEF actually shipped.
It's there, it's usable,
we have a few clients,
and we've made a few improvements
to the SDEF format itself and the
SDP tool that works with it in Panther.
And the cool thing about this is,
and this is one of the reasons we
moved to XML in the first place,
is that we can actually make changes
to the format without incredible
pain in breaking everybody.
So it's all backward
compatible and it all works.
We have several internal clients now.
Mail, iChat, and I believe Xcode are all
using SDEF to generate their
scripting terminology in Panther.
So that's very cool,
especially because it forced us to
fix several things that were broken.
Direct support in
Cocoa scripting is still coming.
For now you have to use SDP to
turn your SDEF into a script
suite and script terminology file.
and others.
So, we're working on that.
Maybe Panther, maybe not.
We're working on that.
Okay, next slide.
The bad news.
Here's what didn't make it.
Codeless terminology and AppleScript 10.
Now, I want to be clear here that we
are still planning on doing these.
We haven't given up.
However,
they're not ready for prime time yet.
In fact, they're not even really
ready for late night.
Hopefully next year I will have some
good news on this slide instead.
Alright, next, the weird news.
So, Carbon scripting, you know, the
We really, really liked Cocoa Scripting.
We liked what it does for you.
We liked the way it very neatly
meshes with your application.
You have to put in very little effort to
make your Cocoa application scriptable,
and that's really what we wanted
to emulate with Carbon Scripting.
So it was supposed to be very much
a parallel to Cocoa Scripting.
It was built around object methods
instead of these accessor functions,
which you largely had to write yourself.
And it would just do a lot more for
you than the old object support did.
So, you know, we thought about, you know,
we were looking at this
and trying to design it,
and you know, looking at all the work,
and saying, "Okay, it's going to be just
like Cocoa Scripting,
and okay,
so we have to write all this stuff,
and it's going to be just
like Cocoa Scripting,
and we have to test it,
and it's going to be just
like Cocoa Scripting,
and we have to document it,
and it's going to be just like
Cocoa Scripting." What would happen
if we just used Cocoa Scripting?
Well, you know, we tried it,
and it actually works astonishingly well.
Next.
No lie.
It really does.
What you do is you
link in Foundation Kit,
which has all the scripting support.
You write Objective-C classes that
essentially front-end all your scripting,
and they talk to your real
Carbon implementation.
And you add one line
to your initialization,
and it pretty much just works.
So you can use this to
do scriptable plug-ins.
System Events does this today.
It's actually been doing
them for several releases.
It's all already documented.
And it also works on
any version of Mac OS X.
You don't have to wait
for Panther to use it.
There are some more details
on this in Session 4.14,
which I completely forget
exactly when it is,
but go see that one,
Making Your Carbon and
Cocoa Applications Scriptable.
So, you know, this sounds,
this is pretty cool, right?
You know, it works, it's documented,
it's there.
Hang on and listen to the fine print.
Next slide.
So first off,
this is not completely free.
There are significant
runtime costs to this.
Depending on if you do
sort of the naive approach,
it can actually add several seconds
to your application launch time.
There are ways around this, however,
and we have some documentation
prepared for those.
The other thing is that writing glue to
your existing application might be hard,
depending on how your
application is implemented.
Of course, you're probably going to
have that problem no matter
what kind of API we provided.
There's only so far we can pull a really
old and crusty application design.
The other problems have to do
with Cocoa Scripting itself.
Cocoa Scripting,
while it's pretty darn good,
is not perfect.
Its error handling is, shall we say,
substandard.
However,
changes in Panther correct a lot of that.
You can now get in sort of through
the back door to do all the things
that Cocoa Scripting won't do for you,
and you weren't able
to do that in Jaguar.
So you can at least fix things yourself.
In the future,
we hope to improve Cocoa Scripting
so that it really does handle all
this sort of thing correctly for you.
Pretty much all of our attention in
terms of making applications scriptable
will be focused on Cocoa Scripting.
Next.
Oh, yes.
So, summary.
So, SDEV is here today.
Use it.
It's a lot nicer than writing
sweet script terminology
or AET resources by hand.
So please use it.
Give us feedback.
Carbon scripting is Cocoa scripting.
So, you know,
this solution is not for everyone.
go to session 414 and figure out whether
or not this actually works for you.
It does work,
but it's not completely ideal.
and still to come, AppleScript 10,
Codeless Terminology.
We're actually going to
do this stuff for real.
At least, that's my plan.
So, that's it for me.
Thank you very much.
Come on back, Todd.
All right,
well I'd like to conclude with a,
we've run through some
of the documentation
resources we have available.
Next slide please.
We've got a substantial reference library
consisting of lots of different pieces
I'm going to walk through one by one.
We've got a lot of updated content
in the Panther Help Center,
which you can see much of it is
ready and in the developer preview.
And a little bit of idea about
what we're planning for the future,
updating the language guide, of course.
And we're planning to write a new
book on scripting interface guidelines
to give all of you who are making
your applications scriptable a better
idea of how to make your application
scriptable in a way that's going to
be consistent across the platform
with other applications so it's
easier for your customers to learn
how to script your application.
Slide, please.
We're excited about it too.
So we've got lots of
documentation for scripters.
Of course,
the language guide is useful for
application developers as well.
Next slide, please.
We've got lots of documentation
for application developers,
whether you're Carbon or Cocoa,
and of course, we just learned that
sometimes it doesn't matter.
Next slide, please.
Lots of studio documentation.
Next slide.
We've got a series of technical
notes about specific areas of
AppleScript and related technologies.
Next slide, please.
And this particular reference
includes links to the previous ones,
as well as a lot of other technical
notes that you might find useful.
Next slide.
There are some technical Q&As where
we've got questions that developers
have asked over time and answers,
as well as a lot of sample code.
We've got the AppleScript website,
which is a great one-stop shop.
It has links to many of the
resources I just talked about.
There are lots of third-party websites,
perhaps maintained by some of
you out there in the audience,
and we thank you for that.
There's the O'Reilly book,
as well as many other
third-party books on AppleScript,
and there are more coming all the time.
So I'd just like to sum up by
quickly going over what's next.
We're going to be shipping
AppleScript 1.9.2 in Panther,
and you have a version of that with the
developer preview with lots of enhanced
scriptability and some great new tools.
And we'll be working on delivering
AppleScript 10 to you after Panther.
So what can you do with the
developer preview that I'm sure
many of you have picked up already?
Well, if you're an application developer,
you can test your application,
make sure it still works.
You can, I hope,
take advantage of some of the
enhancements to Cocoa Scripting
we've referred to and improve
the error handling of the
scriptability in your application.
We strongly encourage you to adopt the
new OSA API so that your applications
work with not only the old formats,
but also the new bundle formats.
And definitely start writing
terminology using SDEF.
As Chris explained, we've got a couple of
clients inside Apple,
and we'd like to have you join us.
If you're a scripter,
there were the few changes that
I talked about that you need to prepare
your scripts for if they're affected,
and test them on the developer
preview to make sure that they'll
run when you move to Panther.
And with that,
we'll get to kind of the standard slides.
These are some of the contacts.
Of course, you all know Sal.
Now you've met me.
Developer technical support and the
engineer who covers AppleScript,
Jean-Montbriand.
And Jason Yeo,
the Mac OS Technology Manager,
who's going to be up here
shortly to help run the Q&A.
Next slide.
We've got a great slate
of sessions this week.
The order is a little bit weird,
but we're going to do
the feedback forum next,
actually, on Wednesday morning,
so we hope to see you there.
We'd love to get your
feedback on what you'd like,
what we've talked about today,
what you see in the next couple days
as you work with the developer preview,
what you'd like to see in the future.
We've got sessions on
interactions with other important
Apple technologies like QuickTime,
of course the Studio session.
Making your application scriptable.
Next slide.
And a set of sessions on
Friday dealing with different
aspects of using scriptability to
solve different types of problems,
whether you're testing software
or whether you're trying to make
your life as a system administrator
much easier on Mac OS X.